NEP: Making details of ``np.core`` private (#11924)
numpy/numpy: doc/neps/nep-0023-restructuring-np-core.rst

* Moving a function from one file to another
* Removing an "unused" import from a file

This traps us into creating increasingly convoluted [1]_ and cyclic imports, under the constant fear that a reorganization will break downstream code.

This NEP does not consider ``np.lib``.

Detailed description
--------------------

The list of existing modules within ``np.core`` is::

	>>> import inspect
	>>> [name for name, mod in inspect.getmembers(np.core, inspect.ismodule)]
	['_internal',
	 '_methods',
	 'arrayprint',
	 'char',
	 'defchararray',
	 'einsumfunc',
	 'fromnumeric',
	 'function_base',
	 'getlimits',
	 'info',
	 'machar',
	 'multiarray',
	 'numeric',
	 'numerictypes',
	 'rec',
	 'records',
	 'shape_base',
	 'umath']

The publicness of this API surface is contagious - in principle, ``np.core.numerictypes.array`` (an alias of ``np.core.multiarray.array``) is part of the API too.

This is problematic - it means that if ``numeric.py`` contains ``from numpy.core.multiarray import array``, then we can never remove that line, without risking breaking someone using ``np.core.numeric.array``.

The proposal here is to:

> * Make all of the existing modules within `np.core` private, adding a leading underscore to their names.

Reviewer: Maybe a lot less work: move `np.core` to `np._core` (and and import warnings for `np.core`)

Reviewer 2: @rgommers A similar thought occurred to me. This is beginning to sound like the evolution of the `numpy.testing` package where we ended up with a couple of stub modules and `_private`. A clear statement of intent and justification would be good to have.

Reviewer 2: I see that there is a statement of intent. Maybe we can expand this to a discussion of what we would like NumPy to look like in the long term.

    	"np.core.numeric is an implementation detail, and may be removed in future. If you are using a member of this module, you should be importing it from np.core directly.", DeprecationWarning
    )

    _globals = set(globals())

    # the value of ``np.core.numeric.__all__`` in the pre-NEP23 revision
    __all__ = [
		'ALLOW_THREADS',
		'AxisError',
		'BUFSIZE',
		'CLIP',
		...
    ]

    # the public values in set(dir(np.core.numeric)) - set(__all__) in the pre-NEP23 revision
    _old_dir = [
		'absolute_import',
		'basestring',
		'builtins',
		'collections',
		'division',
		'extend_all',
		'fromnumeric',
		...
    ]

    # the exact modules these are imported from is now free to change
    from ._numeric import (
    	ALLOW_THREADS,
    	AxisError
    )

    # verify that we did not expose anything we should not have
    _exposed = set(globals()) - _globals
    assert _exposed == set(__all__) | set(_old_dir)

Something to be aware of here will be the fact that ``dir`` of ``np.core.numerictypes``, and of any module that does ``from np.core.numerictypes import *`` is platform-dependent, as it contains all the type aliases.

Backward compatibility
----------------------

> In some cases, there may be members at ``np.core.*.*`` which we intended to be public-facing. Users of these will receive ``DeprecationWarning``s until we lift these members to ``np.core.*``.

Reviewer: I don't think those exist. The whole `np.core` was never intended to be public (and arguably it isn't, missing underscores or not), so submodules of `np.core` certainly weren't intended to be public.

Author: Updated the text with this example

==============================================
NEP 23 — Making details of ``np.core`` private

> ==============================================

Reviewer 2: Number needs updating to 46. Also needs a new file name.

Reviewer: 47 now

The ``np.core`` package consists of a collection of submodules, most of which
have a name not prefixed with an underscore - the pythonic way to indicate a
public API.  The naive user will consider the full set of members within any of
these modules as a public API. Since these submodules import names from other
submodules, these imported names appear to be part of the public API too.

As a result of this, any of the following can be seen as a breaking change:

* Moving a function from one file to another
* Removing an "unused" import from a file

This traps us into creating increasingly convoluted [1]_ and cyclic imports,
under the constant fear that a reorganization will break downstream code.

This NEP does not consider ``np.lib``.

Detailed description
--------------------

The list of existing modules within ``np.core`` is::

	>>> import inspect
	>>> [name for name, mod in inspect.getmembers(np.core, inspect.ismodule)]
	['_internal',
	 '_methods',
	 'arrayprint',
	 'char',
	 'defchararray',
	 'einsumfunc',
	 'fromnumeric',
	 'function_base',
	 'getlimits',
	 'info',
	 'machar',
	 'multiarray',
	 'numeric',
	 'numerictypes',
	 'rec',
	 'records',
	 'shape_base',
	 'umath']

> The publicness of this API surface is contagious - in principle,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`np.core` and its submodules greatly increase the public API surface of NumPy—in principle, for example,
```

``np.core.numerictypes.array`` (an alias of ``np.core.multiarray.array``) is
part of the API too.

This is problematic - it means that if ``numeric.py`` contains ``from
numpy.core.multiarray import array``, then we can never remove that line

> without risking breaking someone using ``np.core.numeric.array``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
without risking breaking code importing ``np.core.numeric.array``.
```

The proposal here is to:

* Make all of the existing modules within `np.core` private, adding a leading
  underscore to their names.
* Introduce a set of new modules with the same names as the old ones, which:

  * hard-code a list of the public API surface of their module at the time of
    its creation
  * emit a ``DeprecationWarning`` upon import, warning the user that they are
    relying on implementation details.

> Implementation

Reviewer 3: Maybe the implementation code should be left to a PR, that can be linked in.  My take was that the Implementation sections are for discussing implementation decisions, but not code.

    __all__ = [
		'ALLOW_THREADS',
		'AxisError',
		'BUFSIZE',
		'CLIP',
		...
    ]

    # the public values in set(dir(np.core.numeric)) - set(__all__) in the pre-NEP23 revision
    _old_dir = [
		'absolute_import',
		'basestring',
		'builtins',
		'collections',
		'division',
		'extend_all',
		'fromnumeric',
		...
    ]

    # the exact modules these are imported from is now free to change
    from ._numeric import (
    	ALLOW_THREADS,
    	AxisError
    )

    # verify that we did not expose anything we should not have
    _exposed = set(globals()) - _globals
    assert _exposed == set(__all__) | set(_old_dir)

Something to be aware of here will be the fact that ``dir`` of
``np.core.numerictypes``, and of any module that does ``from
np.core.numerictypes import *`` is platform-dependent, as it contains all the
type aliases.

Backward compatibility
----------------------

In some cases, there may be members at ``np.core.*.*`` which we intended to be
somewhat public-facing.  An example of such a function is
`numpy.core.numeric.normalize_axis_index`, which downstream libraries are
starting to use to validate axis arguments.  Users of these functions will

> receive ``DeprecationWarning``s until we lift these members to ``np.core.*``.

Reviewer 3: Not sure what "until we lift these members to np.core" means here.  They should probably be lifted to `numpy.lib`?
